[NDMII-3557] Create VPN Monitoring docs (#30803)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/network_monitoring/devices/vpn_monitoring.md

---
title: VPN Monitoring
description: Get started with monitoring your devices VPN tunnels.
further_reading:
  - link: "https://www.datadoghq.com/knowledge-center/network-monitoring/snmp-monitoring/"
    tag: "Knowledge Center"
    text: "SNMP Monitoring Overview"
  - link: "https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/monitor-snmp-with-datadog/"
    tag: "Blog"
    text: "Monitor SNMP with Datadog"
---

## Overview

> VPN monitoring provides visibility into your devices VPN tunnels within Network Device Monitoring (NDM). This feature allows you to keep track of critical data and metrics to examine the health of your VPN tunnels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
VPN monitoring provides visibility into your devices' VPN tunnels within Network Device Monitoring (NDM). This feature allows you to keep track of critical data and metrics to examine the health of your VPN tunnels.
```

> When configured, the SNMP check collects VPN tunnel data from your devices. This can be configured for individual as well as Autodiscovered devices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When configured, the SNMP check collects VPN tunnel data from your devices. This can be configured for [individual][4] as well as [Autodiscovered][5] devices.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Prerequisites 

Agent version `7.70` or higher.
```
FYI We are only on `7.68.3` right now so just making a note that we can't publish this until 7.70 is out but I'm sure you know this :)

### Limitations

> - Only Cisco IPsec VPN tunnels are currently supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Support is limited to Cisco IPsec VPN tunnels.
```

## Configuration

1. Install or upgrade the [Datadog Agent][1] to v7.70+.

2. Edit the `snmp.d/conf.yaml` file in the `conf.d/` folder at the root of your [Agent's configuration directory][2] for individual devices, or the [`datadog.yaml`][3] Agent configuration file for Autodiscovery.

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Individual" %}}

To enable VPN monitoring to all _manually_ configured devices, add the `collect_vpn` configuration in the `init_config` section:

> ```yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```yaml
{{< highlight yaml "hl_lines=4" >}}
```
double check I have the correct line :) This is a nice markdown addition to highlight the line the user should add, see example: https://docs.datadoghq.com/network_monitoring/devices/guide/device_profiles/?tab=devicescanrecommended#prerequisites

init_config:
  loader: core
  use_device_id_as_hostname: true
  collect_vpn: true          # (default false) enable collecting VPN tunnel data
instances:
  - ip_address: '1.2.3.4'
    community_string: 'sample-string'
    tags:
    - 'key1:val1'

>     - 'key2:val2'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - 'key2:val2'
{{< /highlight >}}
```

```

Or, apply the `collect_vpn` configuration _per_ instance:

> ```yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```yaml
{{< highlight yaml "hl_lines=10" >}}
```

init_config:
  loader: core
  use_device_id_as_hostname: true
instances:
  - ip_address: '1.2.3.4'
    community_string: 'sample-string'
    tags:
      - 'key1:val1'
      - 'key2:val2'

>     collect_vpn: true        # (default false) enable collecting VPN tunnel data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    collect_vpn: true        # (default false) enable collecting VPN tunnel data
{{< /highlight >}}
```
Here is an example of how this works (Please double check my formatting):
https://datadoghq.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/docs4docs/pages/1182958054/Markdown+Shortcode+Reference#Highlight-lines-in-code-blocks

```

{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Autodiscovery" %}}

To enable VPN monitoring to all _Autodiscovery_ subnets, add the `collect_vpn` configuration under the `network_devices.autodiscovery` section:

> ```yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```yaml
```
Can you apply the same highlighting here to the `collect_vpn` line ?

network_devices:
  autodiscovery:
    workers: 100
    discovery_interval: 3600
    loader: core
    use_device_id_as_hostname: true
    collect_vpn: true        # (default false) enable collecting VPN tunnel data
    configs:
      - network_address: 10.10.0.0/24
        loader: core
        snmp_version: 2
        port: 161
        community_string: '***'
        tags:
        - "key1:val1"
        - "key2:val2"
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Viewing VPN tunnels

To view VPN tunnels in the UI:

1. Select a monitored device in NDM that has VPN tunnels.
2. Click on the **VPN Tunnels** tab in the device's side panel.

### Metrics collected

The following metrics are made available after enabling VPN monitoring:

| Metric Name                   | Description                                                                  |
|-------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | snmp.cipSecTunActiveTime      | The duration the tunnel has been active in hundredths of seconds.            |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `snmp.cipSecTunActiveTime`      | The duration the tunnel has been active in hundredths of seconds.            |
```
Can you add tics to the rest of the metrics here?

| snmp.cipSecTunHcInOctets      | The number of octets received by the tunnel.                                 |
| snmp.cipSecTunHcOutOctets     | The number of octets sent by the tunnel.                                     |
| snmp.cipSecTunInPkts          | The number of packets received by the tunnel.                                |
| snmp.cipSecTunOutPkts         | The number of packets sent by the tunnel.                                    |
| snmp.cipSecTunInAuthFails     | The number of inbound authentications that ended in failure for the tunnel.  |
| snmp.cipSecTunOutAuthFails    | The number of outbound authentications that ended in failure for the tunnel. |
| snmp.cipSecTunInDecryptFails  | The number of inbound decryptions that ended in failure for the tunnel.      |
| snmp.cipSecTunOutEncryptFails | The number of outbound encryptions that ended in failure for the tunnel.     |

## Troubleshooting

> If you experience issues using VPN monitoring, use the following troubleshooting guidelines. If you need further assistance, contact [Datadog support][3].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you experience issues using VPN monitoring, use the following troubleshooting guidelines. If you need further assistance, contact [Datadog support][6].
```

### VPN tunnels not displayed

The VPN tunnel data is collected with SNMP. If VPN tunnels are missing on a device, ensure the following:

- Datadog Agent version 7.70 or later is installed.

> - The device exposes the relevant VPN tunnel data with SNMP, verify that by running the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Verify the device exposes the relevant VPN tunnel data with SNMP by running the following command:
```

```bash
sudo -u dd-agent datadog-agent snmp walk <DEVICE_IP> 1.3.6.1.4.1.9.9.171.1.3.2
```

## Further Reading

{{< partial name="whats-next/whats-next.html" >}}

[1]: /agent
[2]: /agent/configuration/agent-configuration-files/#agent-configuration-directory

> [3]: /help

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[3]: /agent/configuration/agent-configuration-files/?tab=agentv6v7#agent-main-configuration-file
[4]: /network_monitoring/devices/snmp_metrics/?tab=snmpv2#monitoring-individual-devices
[5]: /network_monitoring/devices/snmp_metrics/?tab=snmpv2#autodiscovery
[6]: /help
```
